# dat protocol WG (#24)

*DATE via IRC (#datprotocol)*

[Agenda discussion](https://github.com/datprotocol/working-group/issues/51)

## People

* mafintosh
* rangermauve
* pfrazee
* bnewbold
* okdistribute

## Agenda

* @chartgerink requests we discuss version hashing (datprotocol/DEPs#54)
* Is there a writeup somewhere on how the new multiwriter (union mounts) thing is supposed to work?
* having at least a general quick overview of what people are working on (e.g., multiwiter) and how it is designed

## Meeting Notes

pfrazee was busy so we focused on a subset of the adgenda items that got proposed.

* Version Hashing:
  * mafintosh: https://github.com/mafintosh/hypercore-strong-link
  * mafintosh: we don't have a serialised format spec for that yet
  * bnewbold: does that handle the multi-writer case?
  * mafintosh: you'd want to make one of those for every head in your graph ... that's what i've been doing for that use case
  * rangermauve: if someone in the community lead the way for speccing out the format and doing PRs, would there be bandwidth to review it?
  * mafintosh: i'd love to see a format spec for this, happy to review ... i think the main requirements are that they are "hostname" safe ... ie something you can put here dat://{datkey}{stronglink}/{path-to-resource}
  * bnewbold: I guess i'd want to see things like next gen hyperdrive stabilize (at least as a spec) before commiting to a link schema
  * mafintosh: i'd be down for a spec on how to serialise it now ... it's just a matter on how many links you add
  * bnewbold: fixed-length (or nearly fixed-length) URLs are nice. i'm sure at some point lots of software will cut off at 1000, 4000, whatever number of bytes
  * mafintosh: you can def hash together the treeHashes ... but still want a serialised spec for a single core ... expanding that into multiple cores should not be hard (ie, add more seq numbers most likely)
* multiwriter update
  * mafintosh: follow the v10 branch on hyperdrive ... it's a mount based system ... it's quite neat. you can mount another drive under a namespace currently (still fixing bugs) ... so i can take another dat add it to my dat as a folder basically ... this works quite well in practice
  * okdistribute: is a crdt planned as part of the work?
  * mafintosh: unsure if you classify it as a crdt, but for overlapping mounts. ie. two remote dats mounted on the same folder you can add reduce strategies liek you can in hyperdb
* Updates
  * mafintosh:
    * david mark is heading up hyperswarm
    * you can see all the activity there. he's been blasting tests out
    * we have 100% coverage there now
    * next up he'll fix my retry logic which i'm very excited about. once that's done it's in great shape for general / non-expert use
    * hyperdrive (lead by andrewosh) is getting there also as we iterate it
    * there is a fuse backed daemon in the pipeline as the next thing (we've been working really hard on that)
    * the fuse thing is soooo good btw. we've been running it ourself whilst fixing bugs and it's so powerful
    * it needs mounts to be a bit more stable to not be annoying but andrewosh is hard at work on that
    * there has been a lot of effort into making the user experience non sucky for it also
    * https://github.com/fuse-friends
    * we've been putting the shared libraries into prebuilts and putting them on npm
    * so it can all be instlaled self contained without having users going online to find versions of fuse to install
  * pfrazee:
    Working on Blue in Beaker in time for DTN next week
  * rangermauve:
    * I'm going to be releasing a new version of dat-store this week. It's going to make it easy to have a workflow that's similar to running `dat sync`. You run a service locally, then add a writable folder to sync your FS changes to Dat, or add a readable folder to sync changes from Dat to the FS
    * Next I'm going to be starting on a system tray thing that will encapsulate this functionality.
    * okdistribute: the system tray thing will be nice. Yeah you can run dat in the background without having a terminal open.
    * mafintosh: thinking the end goal for the dat client should be to only be the fuse fs + tray app
    * okdistribute: I agree though, system tray will be nice as a first interaction with dat, instead of the cli. And instead of having a desktop app view, having a web view for stats and controls that connects to local host by default. That way the same interface can be used for remote systems too
  * okdistribute:
    * fundraising updates: jhand Danielle and I are going to csv conf to try to court a half million dollar grant. Wish us luck.
    * jhand and Danielle happen to also be organizing this event :)
    * also, got 50k from wireline to fund daemon/gateway, hyperswarm, and a couple side projects they want related to webrtc and kappa core
    * they want a minimal spanning tree implementation.
    * Ranger will work on that and the gateway/daemon
    * still finding someone for the kappa core work. But perhaps noffle.

## ACTION ITEMS

* [ ] Post on GH issue that a PR to the DPS for specifying the version hash format would be welcome
* [ ] Move the pending agenda items to next weekend
* [ ] Test out keybase fs on windows to test out FUSE
