# dat protocol WG (#26)

*June 26, 2019 via IRC (#datprotocol)*

[Agenda discussion](https://github.com/datprotocol/working-group/issues/56)

## People

* joehand
* pfrazee
* rangermauve
* bnewbold
* karissa

## Agenda

* Review last meeting/action items
- AGENDA ITEM: ...

## Summary/Review of Previous Meeting

* [Meeting notes](https://github.com/datprotocol/working-group/blob/master/meeting-notes/25-12June2019.md)
* [Action Items](https://github.com/datprotocol/working-group/issues/55)

## Meeting Notes

* Updates
    * RangerMauve: Working on the SDK, gonna try to support existing applications with it, using existing stack (discovery-swarm hyperdrive v9) for first version. Not worried about making breaking changes soon since this is an alpha.
    * mafintosh: Daemon progress: down to two bugs, been squashig them all week
    * pfrazee: Blocked on new daemon for dat related, working on unwalled garden and UIs. Prototype of web-of-trust identities on [twitter](https://twitter.com/pfrazee/status/1143681300815056896?s=20). New [p2p stats UI](https://usercontent.irccloud-cdn.com/file/iB4LpYFj/Screen%20Shot%202019-06-26%20at%2012.09.00%20PM.png)
* Corestore
    * RangerMauve: Corestore will be an integral part of how people will build data structures on top of the dat SDK.
    * Missing ability to remove cores, missing core listing from disk, missing extension support
    * listing cores could be important for something like multifeed where the cores aren't really identified in the main log
* Extensions
    * rangermauve: a lot of applications using hypercores are making use of extension messages for coordinating multiple cores
    * I think this speaks to needing some way to persist small bits of metadata about hypercores in addition to their contents
    * Like "here's the list of extensions" and "here's the list of cores for this corestore"
    * mafintoshmakes sense for untrusted applications. You should impl your own listing for those usecases i think
    * re: "trustless applications" trust in our existing data structures relies on users pointing to cores so you can follow an “auth trail”
    * rangermauve Ah, so multifeed would get a corestore for saving the hypercore data, and it'll need some sort of random-access-* for storing the list of cores it got through extension messages? How would we get whatever is replicating corestore to know which extensions to use in the swarming?
    * mafintosh: we talked about having the replicator load extensions (a whitelist) based on the hypercore header type
    * rangermauve Would it be possible to have extensions listed within the header? Whitelists are cool, but I think it'll slow down experimentation and make the daemon less useful for applications
    * mafintosh:  ah yea that’s fine
* Daemon
  * jhand: On the SDK/daemon - Ranger and I were talking about the CLI roadmap and struggled to figure out what the path forward looks like as well.
  * RangerMauve: @mafintosh Are you going to be building a demon specific CLI? Should we maybe replace the current dat CLI with it once it's out? Should we have the existing Dat CLI talk to the daemon under the hood somehow?
  * rangermauve: one thing Joe and I talked about was potentially building the CLI on top of the Dat SDK and then replacing the insides with the daemon once that's stabilized
  * joehand: But also trying to understand what is going to be possible to implement with limited resources
  * rangermauve: Yeah, also what commands will the CLI have is FUSE is the default that the daemon is going to focus on for creating Dats. `dat sync` probably won't make as much sense if the daemon is doing all the synchronizatin and is always active. Will we be able to get regular folder watching in the daemon a la dat-store? mafintosh: I think it'd be nice if the daemon work was more open. It's hard for us to plan stuff when it's all inside private GH repos / people's heads

## ACTION ITEMS

* Give RangerMauve access to daemon repo to prep the SDK
* figure out how the daemon relates to everything
